hey that deal with some changes as I had
noted in the morning teleconference
press session that we're waiting to hear
some aspects from the federal government
and from the chief Public Health Officer
of Canada as well as saw ongoing
communications with fellow chief medical
officers in the country to ensure that
we are consistently responding to this
so I think in lighting first we're going
to ask dr. Jaffe to talk about not so
much detailing a lot of the global
numbers in that but more what has been
transpiring in Ontario that I think
requires us to take some further actions
around that as we deal with the changing
situation and the number of challenge
that we're facing with dealing with a
response on this regard so I'm going to
talk to you talk about the Ontario
numbers in the last 24 48 hours
basically the numbers are going up very
rapidly it's a very quickly evolving
situation now we have found the numbers
of new cases have almost doubled in a
few days and as of today we have a
hundred and seventy two active cases
five still resolved and we're getting
the number of new cases being reported
each day's going up quite quickly we had
32 new ones over the last 24 hours
and a significant number of those that
have been investigated were exposed in
the States
the United States of course as these
reports come in the local Public Health
Unit has to do the case in contact
investigation and as the numbers go up
it takes more time to get through all
those so at this point the good part is
that we have looked at our Sentinel data
where we are testing people who are ill
in hospital with respiratory infections
and sample of those and also outbreaks
of in long term care facilities and
we've tested I think over a thousand and
they're all negative which is good very
good
that we're not missing those cases
however at this point we really cannot
definitively rule out community
transmission
and so that is why at this point we feel
that we need to take more measures and
they'll turn it back to dr. Williamson
No thank you and so as we look at that
when we're talking about other tools
with so far we're doing containment
there's always a question and and the
chief Public Health Officer kind of said
in some parts of the country there is
evidence of community spread we
continually try to search for that among
our data cases so far we're holding on
our containment but with the amount of
inflow of people returning and the high
levels are a number of cases of
positivity we have to look at the
aspects of how we might contain and
control that so we could continue to do
our containment type approach in that
policy now this is similar to what the
WI talked about that if you use social
distancing and those measures alone they
work but not as good as if you can
define containment and augmented by
social distancing so in that we have
continued with the work of Public Health
at the local level cases coming in with
a travel history or contact of a case
we're monitored and they follow up with
those and people around there were
monitored and so you contained that
impact in the community I never less
with the amount of cases and lab tests
flowing through there are some that do
not seem to have a travel history or a
contact case at this stage but if you're
going to undertake to investigate those
ones it takes a lot more work because
you have to go out and and identify not
who they remember the contact but a wide
circle of people they might have been in
contact with and care of that
investigation so it takes even further
or more public health resources to
investigate those and it does take more
time to assess that at the same time you
can see that our resolves is save at
five as the lab system is loading up
there the amount of time you have to do
to clear those ones is taking a bit
longer and we have to identify perhaps
we don't need two negatives if they do
14 and one negative we adequate require
addressed those two questions those
questions to expedite that process
besides that since since the this
morning when some further information
that we received and we're working on
that were taking a number of steps to
increase the social distancing the
aspects inconsistent with our partners
and others at the federal level we're
talking about some additional closures
so we're going to be moving on the the
new number is 50 so groups greater than
50 we're not asking those to be meeting
and they would cancel those or decrease
them somehow to a smaller size in that
aspect we like that to take place as
soon as possible knowing some will take
a while no time a week sometime in a few
days or whatever to get that in place
because there are some stipulations and
things that have to do and we we want to
work with that and we've had I've had a
lot of emails from different ones asking
for some further steps we're going to
talk about now we're asking this affects
all recreational programs and libraries
that has been said by a number of
communications in all private schools
not just the publicly funded schools all
daycares in that either all churches and
other faith settings and all bars and
restaurants with the exception of those
restaurants that could continue to do
takeout and delivery because some people
would still probably benefit if they're
in isolation to have that provision and
make that helpful so asking those things
to stay there and there may be other
things you may want to consider further
but right now those are the things that
we're really asking to take action on
right away because with the number of
individuals coming back in the country
we're going to have to try and put those
things in place to decrease the
potential spread within our communities
so what does that mean for people if you
do not have any symptoms of Kovan 19 and
you're you haven't traveled you're
citizen here we're still asking you to
do distancing like we're trying to we're
trying to emulate here and other people
limited here are your daily activities
mostly around home if you can we're
asking you to work from home in that and
only go out for unnecessary shopping and
appointments so this is for the average
citizens who did not
Travel who have not been over the case
and who do not have symptoms and at the
same time you still monitor and if you
have some symptoms you can look at the
self-assessment tool that we've put out
and we said this morning that's been out
and within the evening that had 94
thousand hits so it's a valuable tool
and tells you to go step by step if I
have some symptoms what do I do and we
don't want everybody going to assessment
centers and the primary care on that
right away but do the self assessment
tool and if you don't have symptoms it
gives you some advice and direction if
you do develop symptoms it gives you
advice and direction about telehealth
who to call in other aspects there so
we'd like you to do that if you think
you've been exposed during that time to
a person with kovin 19 we ask that you
would self monitor for another period of
14 days that means watching for the
signs and symptoms was coughs or throat
shortness of breath and temperature or
fever in that idea there and if you have
that information and you do develop that
that's when you use a self assessment
tool and then you go on to further to
connect with telehealth and you could go
to an assessment center or to a health
care provider or public health for
advice on that and we're trying to ramp
up all those resources as we talked
about this morning to improve a response
time with telehealth bring a lot more
staff on board with the self-assessment
tool assessment centers being opened up
trying to increase our laboratory
testing capacity as quickly as we can on
the aspect there and looking at how we
can improve the resources and capacity
of Public Health to answer all those
questions as well so what have you
traveled outside a can in the last 14
days and you've heard the Prime Minister
talk about some changes with the border
and we're looking at how to enhance that
type of screening at the border because
some people said they've flown in or
come in and no one asked the managing or
didn't say anything and so we've been
looking for having that more thorough
investigation at the border which is a
federal authority and responsibility and
we're hoping that some of the
announcements would it would only but
increase that and improve the recess
staffing and equipment there because
some people have come through and said
no one I asked a couple questions and no
one answered or didn't have the right
documents and materials so this is a
ramping up it takes time and
want that to happen if you travel
outside this is travel anywhere outside
of Canada then you're gonna be asked on
there's two levels the one if you're
asymptomatic and you come back we'd ask
that you would I the terms of you saying
isolate yourself isolate in your home
setting for 14 days definitely the key
is self monitoring limit your social
activities and contacts in that Basin
we're not saying you have to lock
yourself in the room but the same as
like the regular citizens but a bit more
thorough and looking at how you would do
that and limit your activities that your
household and other aspects there and
use other services internet services in
that and their assistance and if you
want you can do the self tool and get
assessed and then you can if you develop
symptoms and you want advice and
direction use the tool first and then
check where you should go or might get
advice on how you follow the next steps
to satisfy your assessment process so
we're also saying that for the 14 days
because it's everybody that includes
children and adults in there that they
resist use of some of the larger
facilities and we've already closed on
the recreational facilities in that so
that'll be limiting so it's basically
everybody being very sensitive we're
also seeing added to our aspect we
talked about throughout this whole
process who we most concerned about and
what using in the other countries that
we've seen results in increased
morbidity and mortality and we said it's
basically the older population those
with comorbidities and people who are
immunocompromised and so asking also
that people who have been in that
situation who have come back that they
would also consider for the next 14 days
limiting their activities outside the
household look at dice elation in that
sense they're monitor symptoms that's
true but try not expose themselves
outside to others and take really focus
on that for the next 14 days especially
and will advise them further if that
needs to continue we're also looking at
ideas around there if workers have
traveled outside and are coming back
what should they do and we're trying to
say there was certain essential workers
such as health care transportation needs
of necessary services and movements and
that and it's quite a long list that
might fit that and we're saying those
ones there because if there's a large
group who have just come back and who
can't go to work that would compromise
our health care response and would
compromise some other essential services
so we're laying out with the federal
government that they would be allowed to
go to work but they would do a lot of
one first with the working with your
employer and they understand that you're
doing a lot of monitoring for symptoms
during that time there's a number of
recommendations down there that what you
would do and including that and if you
develop any idea or any hints of
symptoms you would quickly choose to
isolate to get some assessments done
inform your employer of course and to
wear a mask until such times you got a
chance to be assessed and decide whether
you should continue at work or stay home
at that time and so there's a lot of
directions and detail and granularity
and some of those things that are going
to be sending out in concert with our
healthcare sector and with other key
essential services and they may be at
the municipal level and different
functions that you need to we say a
continuity of operations and things to
support our enhanced social distancing
and so that people in need of services
could get those services and would not
be compromised so we're asking the
employer and you've heard announcement
this morning by both the labor minister
and by also the finance minister and the
premier on the ways that we're trying to
assist to make those type of things
workable and feasible and in any way
possible for us to work together to deal
with this aspect over the next as I said
in the previous conference meeting once
the week ago the next four weeks or six
weeks as we watch this issue we're
continuing to have the schools closed
that's true and some other provinces
have followed suit with that activity in
there as we try to to limit that at this
time so basically we're enhancing our
social distancing we're using as a tool
to try and supplement our ongoing
containment processes we're trying to
support in documents and material up to
people who whether they are never left
the country and asymptomatic what should
you do with Q's and A's on our webpages
we're asking people who have travel and
just come back with the 14-day period
what do I do in that time if I'm
asymptomatic what do I do if I am or
become symptomatic and then we have a
course or ongoing one of people who get
tested and proved to be positive and
then what I do if I'm quite ill I need
to go to a healthcare setting and that
should be also expedited and worked on
for those there so we're trying to
protect our healthcare system from being
overloaded if people don't need to go
but people have a need to know and how
to make sure they get in the know and
know what to do rather than being left
in the darkened sense so we want to
really enhance all those communications
at the same time our assessment centers
should be used for those that need
assessment and their lab testing for
those that have symptoms and to ensure
that we have those that need to be
assessed and that we have to continue to
look at the in the quality of our
testing system to make sure we're not
overloading it and so that those need to
be tested get tested in a tiny fashion
and we don't have to wait for a long
time to do that so so that's the
travelers Wednesday in-home essential
workers we covered that we covered the
closures in there so this is this
attempt right now over the next this
week especially which is the first week
of our March break and the next two
weeks after that how do we handle that
can we I guess people use the term flat
in the curve I guess I'm saying more can
we continue to do our containment here
in Ontario as we have successfully in
one way overcame our first two ways one
was the large concern with the outbreak
in Wuhan and who by province and then we
had the following one with Iran falling
quickly by Italy and then the European
one and now we have this one with the
returning people from the USA and how do
we deal with that
in that number because we're dealing
with much larger numbers and we're
asking that through this social
distancing and these other steps taken
here with a concerted effort
for all Ontarians or the next week or
two because this is unprecedented we
haven't done this before and there's a
lot of things are being done on the move
and the idea behind what we talked about
this morning this afternoon is what can
we do to ensure that Ontarians and and
on Terrans have been doing a great job
on handle this and I think we can rise
the cage and do this over the next two
weeks and pull us under control so
that's we're trying to work on now and
we'll take questions thank you so
regarding bars and restaurants you said
these are now among the places you would
like to see clothes can you be a bit
more clear what is happening in terms of
closures should all bars and restaurants
in Ontario now close we recommend that
they should accept those they could
maintain services for takeout and
delivery change in the past four hours
when you were asked about this and as we
were not on that stage yet as I said the
morning for hours waiting to hear what
the federal government said and what the
only aspects there so as I said we'll
wait to see what happens at one o'clock
and then later and then we had some
further directions from the chief Public
Health Officer of Canada dr. Yaffe
regarding community spread you now said
this can't be ruled out can you expand
on that are we now seeing communities
spread or suspecting community spread is
happening in Ontario and can you expand
on the fact that you say a number of the
new cases have come from the United
States sure well for example in the last
24 hours we had 32 new cases reported I
believe about 10 of them we don't we
still are waiting for details but of the
others about half had to travel to the
United States so some of them were
contacts of cases as well some traveled
other places but we we know that there
is a growing number of cases in the
United States and certainly we're seeing
us a growing and significant proportion
of our cases have had exposures in the
United States so that is a concern
obviously in terms of the community
spread what I'm saying is we cannot rule
it out at this point the investigation
of each case is very time-intensive
Kerli when we're looking at perhaps they
didn't have travel the case didn't have
a travel history they haven't been
around somebody who's been sick so we're
then going into the next level of
investigation and so there have been a
small number of cases where the health
unit public health units are still doing
the investigation but they have not been
able to find a clear link to a case so
we're saying to be conservative we're
saying there we cannot rule it out at
this point question about the contact
tracing when you're saying you know
these are taking a long time to figure
out where exactly people have contracted
the virus at what point like what number
of new cases would it become impossible
to do these full investigations for
every patient and that's our question
we've said all along is that when we
move from containment to mitigation and
we're close in that area there so if you
haven't got the resources to do all that
as you can see I said before the one
thing that we would tend to do is to
ramp up on the protection of our
vulnerable populations and we've done
that with the long term care screening
we've done it with the retirement home
ask them to screen and when those anyway
just keep and we now we put in the 70
year olds - for the next period - almost
like home isolation in a sense but limit
your social contacts and that kind of
aspect there and the other people are
immunocompromised and so then we have to
look at the same time Azhar holding on
the containment at a certain time when
do we say we're going to shift over and
not shift over so right now we have been
containing and as far as even the wo
said and I agree it's it's better than
just social distancing alone if you can
do both all the better
so can we maintain that and then what
are the issue border issues that the
prime minister announced is that going
to impact yes or no especially where the
number of people are feeling obliged or
obligated to come back from the USA and
we don't know the epidemiology or what's
happening in the various states
throughout the US where all our people
are down there would want to be coming
back how many have been exposed and I
suppose we have a significant number of
cases being pause
and then if that's if that happens and
you can imagine how many would be coming
in a certain day well over two to three
hundred thousand people can be coming in
and so that means how do you handle that
so we have to look at those
practicalities in there and still
protect our vulnerable and protect our
health care system conversation today
about whether or not cell phone data
could be something that's used to
contact trace is that something in your
opinion that would be useful we know on
one country they've done that and we're
looking at all those options there one
of the things is Ontario and like the
country did that is quite big we have
lots of large Romania remote remote
areas that don't have the coverage so we
would have to address the strengths of
that and some of the limitations therein
but always ideas are being considered
about the case where a CBSA officer has
tested positive and if this did happen
at the airport what kind of spread would
that be considered and should people be
concerned at the airport did you want to
talk about that case for myself okay so
this was with the appeal health
department is phone up on this case and
as always you want to look at that
individual and in their work environment
of course lots of travelers whereas the
person exposed or not exposed was there
as their adequate protection that kind
of thing there and then are there other
employees who might have been involved
in that period so that investigation is
ongoing at this time so we haven't got
that final report back from peel but the
it's all part of the case contact
management in that regard to contain
that if there is any other cases
addressed or sorry any other cases that
are attached to that person then we have
a cluster investigation it's determined
if that did happen at the airport would
that be considered community's breath
that would be called a cluster that
means like a workplace like we've done
before remember there was a place where
was a workplace that was followed with
employees and there's one other case a
tent right there there was another one
where there was an ESL class so you deal
with as a potential site cluster and if
you can map that out
you can follow all those people that are
in that and assess did you get a spread
or not a spread and so that's not a
community-wide and that's the difficulty
the term community and I think it's
sometimes misunderstood that all these
cases arise in the community not all
through hospital admissions so they're
all people that didn't go in the
hospital and a lot of them are seen on
the assessment centers so in a way
they're assessed and found to be
positive in the community and they're in
reside in the kidney so obviously we
don't mean that by community because
that's one term you're talking about a
community case that doesn't seem to have
any history of travel any history of
contact of a case that means you say
well they could have got it from the
community do we know how they got it
that takes a lot more investigation now
if you find that someone in a setting
and a group of people in a certain area
and three or four others got it and it
didn't go beyond that is it in the
community or is it in a part of the cuny
that you have walled off with the
cluster investigated that happens quite
commonly and Toronto and others have
taken part in some of those
investigations much like you have with
one of the homes in Toronto and they're
doing that as a cluster investigation
there if you have community-wide spread
that means there's a potential that
you're saying it's gone from person to
person to person and it's out there and
then when you say it's community wide
spread then your containment potentially
has not it will no longer be able to
hold that so you have to see it's a
spectrum it moves across there and so I
think the term sometimes gets bandied
around a little bit you have to
understand from public health management
measures it means different things in
different settings and so I was just
saying cost is how to use the word
community in the community or community
spread and we're always looking for has
it gone community wide and that's what
the question we always ask ourselves
that's why we're doing the sentinel
surveillance saying did we miss out on
that and are there so far they're
negative because of anything if it's
community spread people probably should
still get some symptoms probably still
went to the hospital with maybe that was
flu and got seen and so we want to keep
assessing and checking for that in that
so
right now we haven't seen it we're
continually looking for is it fair to
say that the Ontario cases to date have
been fairly mild and which conditions
are the the ones that actually create
the possibility of you having a more
severe case
Kovach 19 so I would say that the cases
the vast majority of the cases have not
required hospitalization I think
currently we have two people
hospitalized so they're relatively mild
obviously they don't require acute care
which is very good
the kit the people that are usually
considered more high risk for
complications generally are as dr.
Williams said older people and they talk
about 60-plus they talk about 70 plus
depends on what you mean by older but
certainly over 70 and people with
underlying health conditions diabetes
heart or lung conditions
immunocompromised people those are the
kinds of conditions that experience has
shown us have are more likely to have
more serious infection when you're
talking about groups of 50 or more on
public transportation at one street rat
has 50 people what are you what are you
saying both people that take Metrolinx
or or go or TBC or even calves because a
lot of component calves are they
essential services are
yeah well cabs would be smaller of
course and how they deal with those but
these are all good questions as we look
at all the ramifications how we would do
this and in a way that's effective and
efficient that way without compromising
overall care and services I think when
you're asking about streetcars and is
that we have to look we've already had
discussion with Metrolink they've made
some announcements already the fact if
you get on a streetcar and you stay on
for two minutes and get off again it's
that a really big issue there's a lot of
things that play in there because some
people still have to use that to get to
essential services and work if they feel
they have to do that they may not have
provision of a vehicle to get there and
so that we don't want to undermine that
already you've seen a number a drop in
usage and are people involved in
transportation right now and so it's
what we're going to have to address if
it still is an issue and how we might
work with our counterparts with
Metrolinx and others to say how can we
make this still safe and meet that
criteria and so the distancing earth the
six feet can be maintained in that while
there could be like 10 or 20 people in a
single car but no one's within six feet
of each other is that a big deal we can
you do that or Peale's it was so crowded
we had no choice
after you wait for two or three to go by
and wait for an empty one so this is
kind of decision making we're asking you
to make and you assess that situation
and so I don't have a carte blanche
answer for that one there
I think gonna have to wait and see how
it goes and take advice of those
involved in that area to give us further
direction of how we might mitigate if
there's any potential of not getting the
distancing
in that perspective
a shortage of supplies and protective
equipment and ventilators and there are
concerns about this so our demands on
that for them this has been our command
table is continually working at this
issue here with how to get the proper
amounts equipment whether it's gowns or
masks or different aspects there with a
global shortage of course right now
we're maintaining that we're not
satisfied that we want to go and see we
get more to make sure we're and have
that available at when we need it and so
and we're asking our various sub sector
workers to use the stewardship and
conserve what you have in there because
if you have your you're doing if you're
wearing some when you don't need it then
you've used it already if you're wearing
too much you don't need it but you want
it when you really do need it because we
want to protect our healthcare workforce
so that when yours things that are
definitely known or potentially airborne
they need to wear that kind of
protection and how do you facilitate
that like even when you're bringing
people through assessment centers you
can have the like we did during h1n1
SARS you have a physical barrier so the
person doing the interviewing doesn't
have to wear the protector so because
you have the physical bear and you can
put those things in place so these are
these are all things you can do to
minimize the usage while we still go out
looking to get more and we've been given
approval to try and obtain those and
again it's a supply issue that we work
at daily going after your call no you go
ahead and then I got a couple here from
people outside and then we'll go back to
the top yeah okay you just explained why
this isn't mandatory or like tell us
what you would say to a restaurant owner
who's going oh it's not mandatory it's
just a recommendation I'm gonna stay
open in my in my power and authority I
can recommend I don't have that power to
close places you'd have to bring in
higher levels of legislation and power
and control to do that and so thus far a
number them have been asking for that
and public have been asking so I think
some of these in my mind sort of
resonate with most the public and that's
we've been asking for as they want to
have that participation so I would like
to close but I think my competition
should do the same thing so where's the
even playing field so we have the
recommendation that's fine if we feel we
have to go to much more power on earth
or we'd have to go to a level above me
to obtain that Hey
sorry are you gonna get in there with
your other other testing centers
specifically I'm wondering if you talked
to the ball you but people that are
visiting them and if you feel as if that
is actually having an impact on
relieving pressure on emergency rooms
across the province
well where as they're opening up one
after another we're trying to assess
that we haven't we've looked at some of
our dashboard and it's interesting that
our IDI visits have gone down at the
moment so that's encouraging we're
trying to ask that people at first
people are just going to Assessment
Center just because I want to know and
we're saying if you don't have symptoms
don't go and that's why I put out this
self-assessment tool and so we're making
sure that doesn't get overloaded and so
I think from the early data we're seeing
that has reduced the I think a good
amount the IDI visits so that's
reassuring so it gives us that greater
flex if the more severe cases have to
moved over then we still keep them ready
to go and of course there's the ongoing
emergency health issues that are not
taking a break they sought to be handled
and so that's the case and we're also
looking at how do we ensure if we need
beds and that and looking at different
steps and processes this is all the
command table and we're making some
progress on that as well to give us
greater latitude and how we would deal
with there was a potential all of a
sudden surge in cases and as dr. Jaffe
said right at the moment field this
process we haven't had very many
hospitalizations fortunately and we had
the one death unfortunately and so we're
still monitoring that closely we can't
rest on that we have to plan and
scenario design for if it was more
complicated you know can you explain why
there's so many and then
the source of transmission for those
would be announced you know I think the
number the numbers are going up quickly
as I said as we get the reports and as
the local health unit gets the report
they then have to contact the case and
get all the information from the case
make sure you know the case is isolated
or hospitalized as the case may be and
then interview the case in in great
detail about exactly where they've been
in the last 14 days who they've been
with and you know sometimes person
doesn't remember they have to be
reinterviews and then and then go back
and find out where have they been who've
they been with exactly what were they
doing and then of course since they
became symptomatic and 24 hours before
that where have they been and who if
they've been with in terms of who they
might have exposed so those are very
detailed interviews that take quite a
bit of time and then they go back and
interview who they've been with and
someone so and of course some health
units have had a large number of cases
so they have to assign staff to do that
and that's why it takes time but we
absolutely update the data as we get it
yes absolutely but you know we they go
back and re-interview and re-interview
to make sure we haven't missed anything
and people like if you think about
yourself do you remember everything you
did in the last 14 days and who you were
with and what you were doing and it
might come back to you later
so we do go back and reinter view as
well if you hear that we put out the
call for people who are self isolating
or whatever a lot of people are asking
the same things since you're requesting
daycares to close what should be done
about essential workers Quebec is is
offering free day care for all essential
workers with kids up to age 13 so any
recommendations on that
I think it's a good question that's why
we had initially kept them open I tried
to and knew it was by very much the
local organizations the private owners
as well as the Boards of Education of
house and of them in their public
schools to see if they could leave them
open to assist in that regard because
the time we have to go towards closing
that we've had a lot of concerns from
the employees in those places that are
worried about that and so we're taking
those steps I think the aspects you've
raised if it becomes an issue and we
come aware of it we're looking at ideas
I mean I would look at ideas and
alternatives that would assist
especially to ensure that our essential
staff can report to work and continue to
serve our health system there so it's
going to be on a very much assessing and
reviewing and coming up with ideas and
directions on that so the government
have to step in and step up it goes both
ways I could recommend but sometimes
that involves a policy direction that
would come from other other ministers
and either finance or labor and as an
aspect there but it's part of the
overall approach another one from there
is
I need to villa at her news coverage
which is going on right now she has
confirmed community spreads and said
there's a number of cases they just
can't like - what barber yeah people
just say they just cannot trace like
they don't think they're they're gonna
get to the bottom of it so does that
change anything here in terms of what
non-essential businesses should be doing
for example should non-essential
businesses still be staying open at this
point I know apples closing in stores
and 90s as well what's your
recommendation on that point we have to
send them of the retailers have been
proactive in doing that and have been
consulting with the government in there
and give us some overall approach I
think that's something that would would
would involve further discussion because
the deals don't have health issues but
it deals with economic impacts and other
aspects and essential services in which
one should stay and not stay so I think
that discussion still has to continue
and to see if there would be an overall
position of from either recommendation
my side and with the government if they
had to take steps and directions how to
do that and to work in concert with our
business and retail community and of
course in there there's a lot of
essential ones so you can imagine with
groceries and different things so it's
not there's a wide range of different
ones you'd have to consider like
furniture stores be open and grocery
stores be open or should all the grocery
stores be open and non-essential
businesses be closed given that it's can
spread Mac the feds and the City of
Toronto both sides communities right
we're trying to look at what are those
essential ones and ensuring that and is
there any aspect that impacts direct and
indirect that would have that aspect so
because of the complex and the wide
range like a federal government saying
and we agree that people involved in
transport movement of supplies and
materials they should be exempt in there
those ones that undertake that and
supply the retail stores so there's many
components and parts to it that from an
overall health standpoint I'd say this
is a good thing in general but the
granularity and how you deal with that
would be a wider discussion within the
government
this crisis we still have discussions or
should we just say non-essential retail
businesses should close if there is well
I think when the rapidity from today to
this afternoon and we're we having some
more discussions all the time with with
Minister and then with cabinet and those
things we'll have to wait to see what
decisions and make on that
so things have and are changing fairly
changing quickly so I say stay tuned
from people that are not here little
extra guidance please on housing you
said guard gatherings over fifty so just
to spread out what you said all already
about bars and restaurants so we're
talking movie theaters we're talking
stage plays we're talking everything is
that correct yeah that'd be in the
category there because they have
gatherings of more than fifty point
could have more than 50 people so with
that recommendation stand for them as
well we have to look at see what that
means I mean look at the big long
lineups and that and the ways they can
spread it out and some have already
taken steps to do so in that aspect in
point whether they're going to have more
than 50 people or not at their store at
one time is your recommendation to them
that you should close or stay open it's
a good point because their retail may be
essential services that like groceries
are material and the people needs so
then I again I think those are the kind
of discussions we're we're gonna have to
have you know you've traced the new
cases you say at least you know about
half of them from what you can judge
come from the US are you what is your
reaction to the fact that we have what
we are not closing the board
to us visitors at this point I know the
BC medical health officer has expressed
concern about this as any from either
viewers or any comment on whether there
is concern about Americans still
crossing the border into Canada well
obviously something that is decided at
the federal level so yes I am concerned
obviously about people coming from the
states right now but I'm concerned about
people coming from Italy I'm concerned
about people coming from lots of places
but yes I am concerned about that as
well you know we are on calls almost
daily now with with our counterparts at
the federal level and the other
provinces and territories and this is
obviously an item of discussion and
sorry I just do is it now time for a
coordinated national response across
provinces to say okay this is what we're
keeping open this is what is an
essential service are you now going to
come up with some sort of standardized
measure across the country about what
should be open and what should not or is
it going to be done on a case-by-case
basis between
I think we're all moving in concert
together I think as of this morning the
discussion started about 250 and very
quickly moved across and basically like
polling came to a consensus that's it
none of the closures and those aspects
they're started in one area discussion
was continued
so in since what you're saying is what
we're trying to do because this is a
federation and well we don't pretend to
tell each other what to do we would like
to as much as possible be in concert and
this is something unique to a certain
territory or something that it just
doesn't make sense and we would be able
to explain why that is different and not
trying to critical or judgmental that
sense there so I think from the public
perception and with median stuff is
saying well if it's different why is it
different as a reason why and I are you
in agreement so it continues to move
like this and that's part of the I guess
the Federated discussion on with our
with the federal government in that
regard to be a conservative read aspect
ok can you clarify what your
recommendations are for daycares are
they all going to close or just less no
more than 50
we're saying home and just to circle
back to the community spread aspect and
just wanted to clarification here so now
that we've heard from dr. Davila from
the city side saying that they know that
this does exist is your position then
that you disagree and that you haven't
seen it yet or what's the clarification
there well if I didn't hear the officer
were here we didn't hear what was said I
think whether she's saying I'm not
because the investigation and time and
resources we're not sure that I can't be
insured there isn't community spread so
the doones me not being sure that there
isn't community spread and having direct
evidence that there is community spread
and and as we need to ascertain so that
you can see that there's a person but
there's just all over the place and
there's people and it seems to be
spreading out I don't know what that
data is yet because the cases we've seen
they've done a fantastic job huge job
I've fallen upon all these positive
cases and their case contact management
so that's been a great credit to Toronto
Public Health that one because I don't
want to underestimate how much work that
has and continues to be and it's a
matter of do we have to assess the work
force power and a mandate and can they
need more assistance or not or is it
that in a way has it gone beyond what
they can cope with the management handle
as dr. Yaffe said that kind of further
repeat many interviews and that to carry
that out takes as you can imagine a fair
amount of staff time and is that
capacity not there and what do we do
address that so I haven't had any in
fairness the meeting we're both too
impressed car at the same time
discussions with dr. - did he able to
see what her perception how that she
feels as you can or can't keep doing on
that process and how do we go from here
tested right now for for Kobe 19 I know
the public
agency I said there's a limit on kits
available trying to get more soku for
clarity's sake are you still it still
people who have not traveled are you
still trying to trace community spread
who should actually be getting tested
this is last question covert 19
well good common out very strong that
people are asymptomatic should not be
tested about it interest and we're
seeing don't know if you stop doing that
really maybe see if you're not
symptomatic you should not be tested the
only ones are going to test who are not
symptomatic the moment would be the ones
we're trying to release from quarantine
right and we're trying to say do we go
back from two tests to one because we
wanted because we're our routine before
was right to test 24 hours apart and
maybe because of time that they're done
there for 14 days or 14 plus and they've
been a they're now healthy and have
recovered maybe one test would suffice
but that's a person who's being tested
who's currently not symptomatic but was
a case in there and we found that a lot
of people were going and seeking testing
because this want no you know they
weren't symptomatic in that and so we're
saying if you're not symptomatic you
shouldn't be tested and that keep that
we may have to put some more limitations
around that as our testing capacity gets
overloaded than that because we want to
make sure there's a priority setting of
what should be done and we're having
groups working on that right now to say
do we have to go to there and such that
it doesn't compromise our containment
extensively we can still monitor it and
but some we do really have to test it's
the most well most court if you have
people in the hospital are quite sick we
need to know is it is the case because
that affects your your practice in the
hospital you want to know I do they have
covert 19 or they have tuberculosis or
something ounces add airborne and that
sets up all your ppm their need for
negative pressure and not need and all
these kind of stuff there there's people
who are coming to et who are quite ill
and should they stay home or not stay
home do they have this or do they have
another condition so it's part of that
what physicians need to do to rule in
run out on cases that are concerning and
showing see you start going down
priority basis there
and then which ones would have greatest
impact on community spread or areas that
would be identified so we're working
very assertively on trying to say if we
have to this is all the way looking
ahead
if we have to curtail which ones will be
continued to test so that if they need
testing they say well we're going to
test him but it's busy are going to get
an answer back in a week well for a
doctor in the hospital as an acute care
patient that's not good enough and you
want to turn it on rapidly so we want to
make sure the ones that have to be
turned around get turned around and the
other ones we can deal with and handle
that but that cares to an a whole
education process so that if there's a
change that the public understand what
does that mean does that compromise my
situation or can I work with that and
get clear advice from public health or
from the assessment center that if I
don't need it but and I recover is that
fine and then how do I know if I'm
better and all that kind of stuff so we
have to put all that together so that
the public aren't left confused and we
don't want to do that because this is we
need that ongoing participation so we're
working on that
right now we're trying to ramp up our
capacity heading up we're trying to head
up getting closer to 2000 and we'd like
to think in a week or so or more getting
up to 5,000 a day in that so that's
that's ramping up at this time
you remember it's all in your hands and
Washington that lets anything cold thank
you